[docs] Batch10 date and time functions (#16900)
apache/druid: docs/querying/sql-functions.md

## CURRENT_DATE

Returns the current date in the connection's time zone.

* **Syntax:** `CURRENT_DATE`
* **Function type:** Scalar, date and time

<details><summary>Example</summary>

The following example returns the current date.

```sql
SELECT CURRENT_DATE AS "current_date"
```

Returns the following:

| `current_date` | 
| -- |
| `2024-08-14T00:00:00.000Z `|

</details>

[Learn more](sql-scalar.md#date-and-time-functions)

## CURRENT_TIMESTAMP

Returns the current timestamp in the connection's time zone.

* **Syntax:** `CURRENT_TIMESTAMP`
* **Function type:** Scalar, date and time

<details><summary>Example</summary>

The following example returns the current timestamp:

```sql
SELECT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP AS "current_timestamp"
```

Returns the following:

| `current_timestamp` |
| -- |
| `2024-08-14T21:30:13.793Z` |

</details>

[Learn more](sql-scalar.md#date-and-time-functions)

> ## DATE_TRUNC

Author: It accepts `century` and `millennium ` but I cannot understand its outputs. May be a bug?

Author: For example converts: 
`2013-08-01T08:14:37.000Z` to 
`1970-01-01T00:00:00.000Z`(EPOCH time). Should it not be `2000-01-01T00:00:00.000Z`?

Reviewer: Good question. 

I'm not sure why 'century' and 'millennium' are supported in Druid while I didn't find they're supported in other DBMSs like SQLServer. From intuition, `2013-08-01T08:14:37.000Z` should be truncated to `2000-01-01T00:00:00.000Z`.

Author: Spoke with an engineer, who confirmed that it is indeed a bug, will keep "century" and "millennium" in documentation since they both are part of intended functionality

Rounds down a timestamp by a given time unit.

* **Syntax:** `DATE_TRUNC(unit, timestamp_expr)`
* **Function type:** Scalar, date and time

<details><summary>Example</summary>

> The following example truncates a timestamp from the `__time` column in 

Reviewer: incomplete

## CURRENT_DATE

Returns the current date in the connection's time zone.

* **Syntax:** `CURRENT_DATE`
* **Function type:** Scalar, date and time

<details><summary>Example</summary>

The following example returns the current date.

```sql
SELECT CURRENT_DATE AS "current_date"
```

Returns the following:

| `current_date` | 
| -- |
| `2024-08-14T00:00:00.000Z `|

</details>

[Learn more](sql-scalar.md#date-and-time-functions)

## CURRENT_TIMESTAMP

> Returns the current timestamp in the connection's time zone.

Reviewer 2: This is returning UTC for me. For example it is 15:16 right now locally and I get: `2024-08-21T22:16:59.342Z`

* **Syntax:** `CURRENT_TIMESTAMP`
* **Function type:** Scalar, date and time

<details><summary>Example</summary>

> The following example returns the current timestamp:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following example returns the current timestamp.
```

## TIME_CEIL

> Rounds up a timestamp to a given ISO 8601 time period. Specify a timestamp, `origin`, to provide a reference time from which to start. If provided, `timezone`, should be a time zone name like `America/Los_Angeles` or an offset like `-08:00`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Rounds up a timestamp to a given ISO 8601 time period. Specify a timestamp, `origin`, to provide a reference time from which to start. If provided, `timezone` should be a time zone name like `America/Los_Angeles` or an offset like `-08:00`.
```

* **Syntax:** `TIME_CEIL(timestamp_expr, period[, origin[, timezone]])`
* **Function type:** Scalar, date and time

<details><summary>Example</summary>

> The following example rounds up the `__time` column from the `taxi-trips` datasource to nearest 45th minute in reference to the timestamp `2013-08-01 08:0:00`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following example rounds up the `__time` column from the `taxi-trips` datasource to the nearest 45th minute in reference to the timestamp `2013-08-01 08:0:00`.
```

> The following example takes the `__time` column from the `taxi-trips` datasource and rounds up to nearest 45th minute in reference to the timestamp `2013-08-01 08:0:00`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following example rounds up the `__time` column from the `taxi-trips` datasource to nearest 45th minute in reference to the timestamp `2013-08-01 08:0:00`.
```

```sql
SELECT 
  "__time" AS "original_timestamp",
  TIME_CEIL("__time", 'PT45M', TIMESTAMP '2013-08-01 08:0:00') AS "time_ceiling"
FROM "taxi-trips"
LIMIT 2
```

Returns the following:

| `original_timestamp` | `time_ceiling` |
| -- | -- |
| `2013-08-01T08:14:37.000Z` | `2013-08-01T08:45:00.000Z` |
| `2013-08-01T09:13:00.000Z` | `2013-08-01T09:30:00.000Z` |
</details>

[Learn more](sql-scalar.md#date-and-time-functions)

## TIME_EXTRACT

> Extracts the value of some `unit` of the timestamp and returns the value. If provided, `timezone`, should be a time zone name like `America/Los_Angeles` or an offset like `-08:00`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Extracts the value of `unit` from the timestamp and returns it as a number. If provided, `timezone` should be a time zone name like `America/Los_Angeles` or an offset like `-08:00`.
```
Assuming my understanding of this function is correct, we should specify that it returns the value as a number.

* **Syntax:** `TIME_EXTRACT(timestamp_expr[, unit[, timezone]])`
* **Function type:** Scalar, date and time

<details><summary>Example</summary>

The following example extracts the hour from the `__time` column in the `taxi-trips` datasource and offsets its timezone by `-04:00` hours.

```sql
SELECT 
  "__time" AS "original_timestamp",
  TIME_EXTRACT("__time", 'hour', '-04:00') AS "extract_hour"
FROM "taxi-trips"
LIMIT 2
```

Returns the following:

| `original_timestamp` | `extract_hour` | 
| -- | -- | 
| `2013-08-01T08:14:37.000Z` | `4` |
| `2013-08-01T09:13:00.000Z` | `5` |

</details>

[Learn more](sql-scalar.md#date-and-time-functions)

## TIME_FLOOR

> Rounds down a timestamp to a given ISO 8601 time period. Specify a timestamp, `origin`, to provide a reference time from which to start. If provided, `timezone`, should be a time zone name like `America/Los_Angeles` or an offset like `-08:00`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Rounds down a timestamp to a given ISO 8601 time period. Specify a timestamp, `origin`, to provide a reference time from which to start. If provided, `timezone` should be a time zone name like `America/Los_Angeles` or an offset like `-08:00`.
```

Author: I believe time_floor and time_ceil should be consistent with one another, will rewrite both

> Rounds down a timestamp to a given ISO 8601 time period. You can specify `origin` to provide a reference timestamp from which to start rounding. If provided, `timezone`, should be a time zone name like `America/Los_Angeles` or an offset like `-08:00`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Rounds down a timestamp to a given ISO 8601 time period. You can specify `origin` to provide a reference timestamp from which to start rounding. If provided, `timezone` should be a time zone name like `America/Los_Angeles` or an offset like `-08:00`.
```

* **Syntax:** `TIME_FLOOR(timestamp_expr, period[, origin[, timezone]])`
* **Function type:** Scalar, date and time

<details><summary>Example</summary>

> The following example takes the `__time` column from the `taxi-trips` datasource and rounds down to nearest 45th minute in reference to the timestamp `2013-08-01 08:0:00`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following example rounds down the `__time` column from the `taxi-trips` datasource to the nearest 45th minute in reference to the timestamp `2013-08-01 08:0:00`.
```

Author: Changes are consistent with `TIME_CEIL`

```sql
SELECT 
  "__time" AS "original_timestamp",
  TIME_FLOOR("__time", 'PT45M', TIMESTAMP '2013-08-01 08:0:00') AS "time_floor"
FROM "taxi-trips"
LIMIT 2
```

Returns the following:

| `original_timestamp` | `time_floor` |
| -- | -- |
| `2013-08-01T08:14:37.000Z` | `2013-08-01T08:00:00.000Z` |
| `2013-08-01T09:13:00.000Z` | `2013-08-01T08:45:00.000Z` |

</details>

[Learn more](sql-scalar.md#date-and-time-functions)

## TIME_FORMAT

> Formats a timestamp as a string in a provided [Joda DateTimeFormat pattern](http://www.joda.org/joda-time/apidocs/org/joda/time/format/DateTimeFormat.html). If no pattern is provided, `pattern` defaults to ISO 8601. If provided, `timezone`, should be a time zone name like `America/Los_Angeles` or an offset like `-08:00`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Formats a timestamp as a string in a provided [Joda DateTimeFormat pattern](http://www.joda.org/joda-time/apidocs/org/joda/time/format/DateTimeFormat.html). If no pattern is provided, `pattern` defaults to ISO 8601. If provided, `timezone` should be a time zone name like `America/Los_Angeles` or an offset like `-08:00`.
```

* **Syntax:** `TIME_FORMAT(timestamp_expr[, pattern[, timezone]])`
* **Function type:** Scalar, date and time

<details><summary>Example</summary>

>   The following example formats the `__time` column from the `flight-carriers` datasource into a string format and includes an offset of `-05:00`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following example formats the `__time` column from the `flight-carriers` datasource into a string format and includes an offset of `-05:00`.
```
"includes an offset of `-05:00`" sounds odd to me. What does it offset by `-05:00`?

## TIME_PARSE

> Parses a string into a timestamp using a given [Joda DateTimeFormat pattern](http://www.joda.org/joda-time/apidocs/org/joda/time/format/DateTimeFormat.html) or ISO 8601 if the pattern is not provided. Returns NULL if string cannot be parsed. If provided, `timezone` should be a time zone name like `America/Los_Angeles` or an offset like `-08:00`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Parses a string into a timestamp using a given [Joda DateTimeFormat pattern](http://www.joda.org/joda-time/apidocs/org/joda/time/format/DateTimeFormat.html). If no pattern is provided, `pattern` defaults to ISO 8601. Returns NULL if string cannot be parsed. If provided, `timezone` should be a time zone name like `America/Los_Angeles` or an offset like `-08:00`.
```

> Parses a string into a timestamp using a given [Joda DateTimeFormat pattern](http://www.joda.org/joda-time/apidocs/org/joda/time/format/DateTimeFormat.html), or ISO 8601 if the pattern is not provided. Returns NULL if string cannot be parsed. If provided, `timezone`, should be a time zone name like `America/Los_Angeles` or an offset like `-08:00`.

Author: Found another bug, PR for fix created by engineers :https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16915

* **Syntax:** `TIME_PARSE(string_expr[, pattern[, timezone]])`
* **Function type:** Scalar, date and time

<details><summary>Example</summary>

> The following example parses the `FlightDate` column from the `flight-carriers` datasource, which is stored as a `string`, into a valid timestamp with an offset of `-05:00` hours.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following example parses the `FlightDate` STRING column from the `flight-carriers` datasource into a valid timestamp with an offset of `-05:00` hours.
```

```sql
SELECT
  "FlightDate" AS "original_string",
  TIME_PARSE("FlightDate", 'YYYY-MM-dd', '-05:00') AS "timestamp"
FROM "flight-carriers"
LIMIT 1
```

Returns the following:

| `original_string` | `timestamp` | 
| -- | -- |
| `2005-11-01` | `2005-11-01T05:00:00.000Z` |

</details>

[Learn more](sql-scalar.md#date-and-time-functions)

## TIME_SHIFT

> Shifts a timestamp by a given number of time units. Period can be any ISO 8601 period. Step may be negative. If provided, `timezone`, should be a time zone name like `America/Los_Angeles` or an offset like `-08:00`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Shifts a timestamp by a given number of time units. Period can be any ISO 8601 period. `step` can be a negative value. If provided, `timezone` should be a time zone name like `America/Los_Angeles` or an offset like `-08:00`.
```

Author: I do not like the idea of starting a sentence with code format, will try to re-write it in another way

Author: Will mimic how you fixed it in this example: https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/16900/files#r1724009889

Author: This was the change

"Shifts a timestamp by a given number of time units. The `period` parameter can be any ISO 8601 period, and the `step` parameter may be negative. If provided, `timezone`, should be a time zone name like `America/Los_Angeles` or an offset like `-08:00`."

> Shifts a timestamp by a given number of time units. The `period` parameter can be any ISO 8601 period. T `step` parameter can be negative. If provided, `timezone`, should be a time zone name like `America/Los_Angeles` or an offset like `-08:00`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Shifts a timestamp by a given number of time units. The `period` parameter can be any ISO 8601 period. The `step` parameter can be negative. If provided, `timezone` should be a time zone name like `America/Los_Angeles` or an offset like `-08:00`.
```

* **Syntax:** `TIME_SHIFT(timestamp_expr, period, step[, timezone])`
* **Function type:** Scalar, date and time

<details><summary>Example</summary>

> The following example shifts the `__time` column from `taxi-trips` back by 24 hours.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following example shifts the `__time` column from the `taxi-trips` datasource back by 24 hours.
```
